README.md, before:

# Picton

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](http://jericho.mit-license.org/)
[![Build status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/2tl8wuancvf3awap?svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/Jericho/picton.messaging)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/Jericho/Picton.Messaging/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/Jericho/Picton.Messaging?branch=master)
[![FOSSA Status](https://app.fossa.io/api/projects/git%2Bhttps%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FJericho%2FPicton.Messaging.svg?type=shield)](https://app.fossa.io/projects/git%2Bhttps%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FJericho%2FPicton.Messaging?ref=badge_shield)

## About

Picton.Messaging is a C# library containing a high performance message processor (also known as a message "pump") designed to process messages from an Azure storage queue as efficiently as possible.

I created Picton.Mesaging because I needed a way to process a large volume of messages from Azure storage queues as quickly and efficiently as possible. I searched for a long time, but I could never find a solution that met all my requirements.

In March 2016 I attended three webinars by [Daniel Marbach](https://github.com/danielmarbach) on "Async/Await & Task Parallel Library" ([part 1](https://github.com/danielmarbach/02-25-2016-AsyncWebinar), [part 2](https://github.com/danielmarbach/03-03-2016-AsyncWebinar) and [part 3](https://github.com/danielmarbach/03-10-2016-AsyncWebinar)).
Part 2 was particularly interresting to me because Daniel presented a generic message pump that meets most (but not all) of my requirements. Specifically, Daniel's message pump meets the following criteria:

- Concurrent message handling. This means that multiple messages can be processed at the same time. This is critical, especially if your message processing logic is I/O bound.
- Limiting concurrency. This means that we can decide the maximum number of messages that can be processed at the same time.
- Cancelling and graceful shutdown. This means that our message pump can be notified that we want to stop processing additional messages and also we can decide what to do with messages that are being processed at the moment when we decide to stop.

The sample code that Daniel shared during his webinars was very generic and not specific to Azure so I made the following enhancements:
- The messages are fetched from an Azure storage queue. We can specify which queue and it can even be a queue in the storage emulator.
- Backoff. When no messages are found in the queue, it's important to scale back and query the queue less often. As soon as new messages are available in the queue, we want to scale back up in order to process these messages as quickly as possible. I made two improvements to implemented this logic: 
  - first, introduce a pause when no message is found in the queue in order to reduce the number of queries to the storage queue. By default we pause for one second, but it's configurable. You could even eliminate the pause altogether but I do not recommend it. 
  - second, reduce the number of concurrent message processing tasks. This is the most important improvement introduced in the Picton library (in my humble opinion!). Daniel's sample code uses ``SemaphoreSlim`` to act as a "gatekeeper" and to limit the number of tasks that be be executed concurently. However, the number of "slots" permitted by the semaphore must be predetermined and is fixed. Picton eliminates this restriction and allows this number to be dynamically increased and decreased based on the presence or abscence of messages in the queue.

In December 2017 version 1.2 was released with a dedicated task to fetch messages from the Azure queue instead of allowing each individual concurent task to fetch their own messages.


## Nuget

Picton.Messaging is available as a Nuget package.

[![NuGet Version](http://img.shields.io/nuget/v/Picton.Messaging.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Picton.Messaging/)


## Installation

The easiest way to include Picton.Messaging in your C# project is by grabing the nuget package:

```
PM> Install-Package Picton.Messaging
```

Once you have the Picton.Messaging library properly referenced in your project, modify your RoleEntryPoint like this example:

```csharp
using Microsoft.WindowsAzure.ServiceRuntime;
using Microsoft.WindowsAzure.Storage;
using Microsoft.WindowsAzure.Storage.RetryPolicies;
using Picton.Messaging;
using System;
using System.Diagnostics;

namespace WorkerRole1
{
	public class MyWorkerRole : RoleEntryPoint
	{
		private AsyncMessagePump _messagePump;

		public override void Run()
		{
			Trace.TraceInformation("MyWorkerRole is running");
			_messagePump.Start();
		}

		public override bool OnStart()
		{
			var storageAccount = CloudStorageAccount.DevelopmentStorageAccount;
			var cloudQueueClient = storageAccount.CreateCloudQueueClient();
			cloudQueueClient.DefaultRequestOptions.RetryPolicy = new NoRetry();
			var cloudQueue = cloudQueueClient.GetQueueReference("myqueue");
			cloudQueue.CreateIfNotExists();

			// Configure the message pump
			_messagePump = new AsyncMessagePump(cloudQueue, 1, 25, TimeSpan.FromMinutes(1), 3)
			{
				OnMessage = (message, cancellationToken) =>
				{
					Debug.WriteLine(message.AsString);
				},
				OnError = (message, exception, isPoison) =>
				{
					Trace.TraceInformation("An error occured: {0}", exception);
					if (isPoison)
					{
						// Copy message to a poison queue otherwise it will be lost forever
					}
				}
			};

			Trace.TraceInformation("MyWorkerRole started");

			return base.OnStart();
		}

		public override void OnStop()
		{
			Trace.TraceInformation("MyWorkerRole is stopping");
			_messagePump.Stop();
			base.OnStop();
			Trace.TraceInformation("MyWorkerRole has stopped");
		}
	}
}
```


## License
[![FOSSA Status](https://app.fossa.io/api/projects/git%2Bhttps%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FJericho%2FPicton.Messaging.svg?type=large)](https://app.fossa.io/projects/git%2Bhttps%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FJericho%2FPicton.Messaging?ref=badge_large)

Commit message:

Remove logic to increase/decrease the number slots available in a SemaphoreSlim
Resolves #11

README.md, after:

# Picton

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg)](http://jericho.mit-license.org/)
[![Build status](https://ci.appveyor.com/api/projects/status/2tl8wuancvf3awap?svg=true)](https://ci.appveyor.com/project/Jericho/picton.messaging)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/Jericho/Picton.Messaging/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/Jericho/Picton.Messaging?branch=master)
[![FOSSA Status](https://app.fossa.io/api/projects/git%2Bhttps%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FJericho%2FPicton.Messaging.svg?type=shield)](https://app.fossa.io/projects/git%2Bhttps%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FJericho%2FPicton.Messaging?ref=badge_shield)

## About

Picton.Messaging is a C# library containing a high performance message processor (also known as a message "pump") designed to process messages from an Azure storage queue as efficiently as possible.

I created Picton.Mesaging because I needed a way to process a large volume of messages from Azure storage queues as quickly and efficiently as possible. I searched for a long time, but I could never find a solution that met all my requirements.

In March 2016 I attended three webinars by [Daniel Marbach](https://github.com/danielmarbach) on "Async/Await & Task Parallel Library" ([part 1](https://github.com/danielmarbach/02-25-2016-AsyncWebinar), [part 2](https://github.com/danielmarbach/03-03-2016-AsyncWebinar) and [part 3](https://github.com/danielmarbach/03-10-2016-AsyncWebinar)).
Part 2 was particularly interresting to me because Daniel presented a generic message pump that meets most (but not all) of my requirements. Specifically, Daniel's message pump meets the following criteria:

- Concurrent message handling. This means that multiple messages can be processed at the same time. This is critical, especially if your message processing logic is I/O bound.
- Limiting concurrency. This means that we can decide the maximum number of messages that can be processed at the same time.
- Cancelling and graceful shutdown. This means that our message pump can be notified that we want to stop processing additional messages and also we can decide what to do with messages that are being processed at the moment when we decide to stop.

The sample code that Daniel shared during his webinars was very generic and not specific to Azure so I made the following enhancements:
- The messages are fetched from an Azure storage queue. We can specify which queue and it can even be a queue in the storage emulator.
- Backoff. When no messages are found in the queue, it's important to scale back and query the queue less often. As soon as new messages are available in the queue, we want to scale back up in order to process these messages as quickly as possible. I made two improvements to implemented this logic: 
  - first, introduce a pause when no message is found in the queue in order to reduce the number of queries to the storage queue. By default we pause for one second, but it's configurable. You could even eliminate the pause altogether but I do not recommend it. 
  - second, reduce the number of concurrent message processing tasks. This is the most important improvement introduced in the Picton library (in my humble opinion!). Daniel's sample code uses ``SemaphoreSlim`` to act as a "gatekeeper" and to limit the number of tasks that be be executed concurently. However, the number of "slots" permitted by the semaphore must be predetermined and is fixed. Picton eliminates this restriction and allows this number to be dynamically increased and decreased based on the presence or abscence of messages in the queue.

In December 2017 version 2.0 was released with a much more efficient method of fetching messages from the Azure queue: there is now a dedicated task for this pupose instead of allowing each individual concurent task to fetch their own messages. This means that the logic to increase/decrease the number of available slots in the SemaphoreSlim is no longer necessary and has ben removed.


## Nuget

Picton.Messaging is available as a Nuget package.

[![NuGet Version](http://img.shields.io/nuget/v/Picton.Messaging.svg)](https://www.nuget.org/packages/Picton.Messaging/)


## Installation

The easiest way to include Picton.Messaging in your C# project is by grabing the nuget package:

```
PM> Install-Package Picton.Messaging
```

Once you have the Picton.Messaging library properly referenced in your project, modify your RoleEntryPoint like this example:

```csharp
using Microsoft.WindowsAzure.ServiceRuntime;
using Microsoft.WindowsAzure.Storage;
using Microsoft.WindowsAzure.Storage.RetryPolicies;
using Picton.Messaging;
using System;
using System.Diagnostics;

namespace WorkerRole1
{
	public class MyWorkerRole : RoleEntryPoint
	{
		private AsyncMessagePump _messagePump;

		public override void Run()
		{
			Trace.TraceInformation("MyWorkerRole is running");
			_messagePump.Start();
		}

		public override bool OnStart()
		{
			var storageAccount = CloudStorageAccount.DevelopmentStorageAccount;
			var cloudQueueClient = storageAccount.CreateCloudQueueClient();
			cloudQueueClient.DefaultRequestOptions.RetryPolicy = new NoRetry();
			var cloudQueue = cloudQueueClient.GetQueueReference("myqueue");
			cloudQueue.CreateIfNotExists();

			// Configure the message pump
			_messagePump = new AsyncMessagePump(cloudQueue, 1, 25, TimeSpan.FromMinutes(1), 3)
			{
				OnMessage = (message, cancellationToken) =>
				{
					Debug.WriteLine(message.AsString);
				},
				OnError = (message, exception, isPoison) =>
				{
					Trace.TraceInformation("An error occured: {0}", exception);
					if (isPoison)
					{
						// Copy message to a poison queue otherwise it will be lost forever
					}
				}
			};

			Trace.TraceInformation("MyWorkerRole started");

			return base.OnStart();
		}

		public override void OnStop()
		{
			Trace.TraceInformation("MyWorkerRole is stopping");
			_messagePump.Stop();
			base.OnStop();
			Trace.TraceInformation("MyWorkerRole has stopped");
		}
	}
}
```


## License
[![FOSSA Status](https://app.fossa.io/api/projects/git%2Bhttps%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FJericho%2FPicton.Messaging.svg?type=large)](https://app.fossa.io/projects/git%2Bhttps%3A%2F%2Fgithub.com%2FJericho%2FPicton.Messaging?ref=badge_large)
